THE CONSTITUTION OF KAZAKHSTAN
Adopted by referendum on August 30, 1995.
Entered into force on September 5, 1995.
Amendments and additions were made on October 7, 1998, May 21, 2007,
February 2, 2011, March 10, 2017, March 23, 2019, June 8, 2022, September 17, 2022.
We, the people of Kazakhstan, united by a common historic fate, creating a state on the indigenous Kazakh land, considering
ourselves a peace-loving and civil society, dedicated to the ideals of freedom, equality and concord, wishing to take a worthy place
in the world community, realizing our high responsibility before the present and future generations, proceeding from our sovereign
right, accept this CONSTITUTION.
Section I. General Provisions
Article 1
1. The Republic of Kazakhstan proclaims itself as a democratic, secular, legal and social state whose highest values are a person,
his life, rights, and freedoms.
2. The fundamental principles of the activity of the Republic are public concord and political stability; economic development for the
benefit of all the nation; Kazakhstani patriotism and resolution of the most critical issues of State affairs by democratic methods
including voting by national referendum or in Parliament.
Article 2
1. The Republic of Kazakhstan is a unitary state with a presidential form of government.
2. The sovereignty of the Republic shall cover the whole of its territory. The state shall ensure the integrity, inviolability, and
inalienability of its territory.
3. The law shall determine the administrative-territorial division of the Republic and the status of its capital. The Capital of
Kazakhstan is the city of Astana.
3-1. Within the city of Astana, a special legal regime can be established in the financial sphere in accordance with the constitutional
law.
4. The names "Republic of Kazakhstan" and "Kazakhstan" shall be equal.
Article 3
1. The people shall be the only source of governmental power.
2. The people shall exercise power directly through national referendum and free elections, as well as delegate the execution of
their ability to state institutions.
3. Nobody shall have the right to arrogate the power in the Republic of Kazakhstan. Arrogation of authority shall be prosecuted by
law. The right to act on behalf of the people and the state shall belong to the President, as well as to the Parliament of the Republic
within the limits of the constitutional powers. The government and other state bodies shall act on behalf of the state only within the
limits of their delegated authorities.
4. The state power in the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be unified and executed on the basis of the Constitution and laws in
accordance with the principle of its division into the legislative, executive and judicial branches, and a system of checks and
balances, which governs their interaction.
Article 4
1. The provisions of the Constitution, the laws corresponding to it, other regulatory and legal acts, international agreements and
other commitments of the Republic, as well as regulatory resolutions of the Constitutional Council and the Supreme Court of the
Republic, shall be the functioning law in the Republic of Kazakhstan.
2. The Constitution shall have the highest juridical force and direct effect on the entire territory of the Republic.
3. International agreements ratified by the Republic have primacy over its laws. The legislation of the Republic determines the
procedure and conditions of operation of international agreements in the territory of the Republic of Kazakhstan to which
Kazakhstan is a party.
4. All laws and international agreements, where the Republic is a party, shall be published. Official publication of regulatory and
legal acts, dealing with the rights, freedoms, and responsibilities of citizens shall be the necessary condition for their application.Article 5
1. The Republic of Kazakhstan shall recognize ideological and political diversity. The formation of political parties in state bodies
shall not be permitted.
2. Public associations shall be equal before the law. Illegal interference of the state in the affairs of public associations, and public
associations in the affairs of the state, imposing the functions of state institutions on public associations shall not be permitted.
3. Formation and functioning of public associations pursuing the goals or actions directed toward a violent change of the
constitutional system, violation of the integrity of the Republic, undermining the security of the state, inciting social, racial, national,
religious, and tribal enmity, as well as the formation of unauthorized paramilitary units shall be prohibited.
4. Activities of political parties and trade unions of other states, religious parties, as well as the financing of political parties and
trade unions of foreign legal entities and citizens, foreign states and international organizations shall not be permitted in the
Republic.
5. Activities of foreign religious associations on the territory of the Republic, as well as the appointment of heads of religious
associations in the Republic by foreign religious centers shall be carried out in coordination with the respective state institutions of
the Republic.
Article 6
1. The Republic of Kazakhstan shall recognize and protect state and private property equally.
2. Property shall impose obligations, and its use must simultaneously benefit the society. Subjects and objects of ownership, the
scope, and limits of the rights of proprietors, and guarantees of their protection shall be determined by law.
3. The state shall own the land and underground resources, waters, flora and fauna, and other natural resources. The land may
also be privately owned on terms, conditions and within limits established by law.
Article 7
1. The state language of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be the Kazakh language.
2. Russian language shall be officially used on equal grounds along with the Kazakh language in state institutions and local self-
administrative bodies.
3. The state shall promote conditions for the study and development of the languages of the people of Kazakhstan.
Article 8
The Republic of Kazakhstan shall respect principles and norms of international law, shape policy of cooperation and good-
neighbourly relations between states, their equality and non-interference in each other’s domestic affairs, peaceful settlement of
international disputes and renounce the [first] use of military force.
Article 9
The Republic of Kazakhstan shall have its state symbols - the flag, emblem, and the anthem. The constitutional law shall establish
their description and order of official use.
Section II. Person and Citizen
Article 10
1. Citizenship of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be acquired and terminated, as prescribed by law and shall be indivisible and
equal regardless of the grounds of its acquisition.
2. A citizen of the Republic shall not be deprived of citizenship, the right to change such citizenship, and also may not be expelled
from Kazakhstan. Deprivation of citizenship is allowed only by a court decision for the commission of terrorist crimes, as well as for
causing other grave harm to the vital interests of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
3. Foreign citizenship of a citizen of the Republic shall not be recognized.
Article 11
1. A citizen of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall not be extradited to a foreign state unless otherwise stipulated by international
agreements of the Republic.
2. The Republic shall guarantee protection and patronage to its citizens outside its boundaries.Article 12
1. Human rights and freedoms in the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be recognized and guaranteed in accordance with
this Constitution.
2. Human rights and liberties shall belong to everyone by virtue of birth, be recognized as absolute and inalienable, and define the
contents and implementation of laws and other regulatory and legal acts.
3. Every citizen of the Republic shall have rights and bear responsibilities owing to his citizenship.
4. Foreigners and stateless people in the Republic shall enjoy rights and freedoms as well as bear responsibilities, established for
the citizens unless otherwise stipulated by the Constitution, laws and international agreements.
5. The exercise of a citizen's human rights and freedoms must not violate the rights and freedoms of other people nor infringe on
the constitutional system and public morals.
Article 13
1. Everyone has the right to recognition of his/her legal personality and the right to protect his/her rights and freedoms by all means
not contradicting the law, including the necessary defense.
2. Everyone shall have the right to legal defense of his rights and freedoms.
3. Everyone shall have the right to take qualified legal assistance. In cases stipulated by law, legal assistance shall be provided free
of charge.
Article 14
1. Everyone shall be equal before the law and court.
2. No one shall be subject to any discrimination for reasons of origin, social, property status, occupation, sex, race, nationality,
language, attitude towards religion, convictions, place of residence or any other circumstances.
Article 15
1. Everyone shall have the right to life.
2. No one shall have the right to deprive life of a person arbitrarily. The death penalty is established by law as an exceptional
punishment for terrorist offenses involving the death of people, as well as for particularly serious crimes committed in wartime, with
giving the sentenced person the right to seek pardon.
Article 16
1. Everyone shall have the right to personal freedom.
2. Arrest and detention shall be allowed only in cases stipulated by law and only with the authorization of the with the right of
appeal. Without the authorization of the court, a person shall be detained for a period of not more than seventy-two hours.
3. Every person detained, arrested and accused of committing a crime shall have the right to the assistance of a lawyer (defender)
from the moment of detention, arrest or accusation.
Article 17
1. Human dignity shall be inviolable.
2. No one should be subjected to torture, violence, abusive or other treatment and punishment degrading human dignity.
Article 18
1. Everyone shall have the right to inviolability of private life, personal or family secrets, protection of honor and dignity.
2. Everyone shall have the right to confidentiality of individual deposits and savings, correspondence, telephone conversations,
postal, telegraph, and other messages. The limitation of this right shall be permitted only in cases and according to the procedure
directly established by law.
3. State bodies, public associations, officials, and the mass media must provide every citizen with the possibility to become familiar
with the documents, decisions and other sources of information concerning his rights and interests.Article 19
1. Everyone shall have the right to determine and indicate or not indicate his national, party and religious affiliation.
2. Everyone shall have the right to use his native language and culture, to freely choose the language of communication, education,
instruction and creative activities.
Article 20
1. Freedom of speech and creative activities shall be guaranteed. Censorship shall be prohibited.
2. Everyone shall have the right to freely receive and disseminate information by any means not prohibited by law. The list of items
constituting state secrets of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be determined by law.
3. Propaganda or agitation for the forcible change of the constitutional system, violation of the integrity of the Republic, undermining
of state security, and advocating war, social, racial, national, religious, and clannish superiority as well as the cult of cruelty and
violence, shall not be allowed.
Article 21
1. Everyone who has the legal right to stay within the territory of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall have the right to free movement
throughout its territory and free choice of a place of residence, except in cases stipulated by law.
2. Everyone shall have the right to leave the territory of the Republic. Citizens of the Republic shall have the right to return to the
Republic freely.
Article 22
1. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of conscience.
2. The right to freedom of conscience shall not specify or limit universal human and civil rights and responsibilities before the state.
Article 23
1. Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall have the right to freedom of forming associations. The activities of public
associations shall be regulated by law.
2. Military servants, employees of national security agencies, law enforcement agencies and judges shall not be members of
parties, trade unions, or speak in support of any political party.
Article 24
1. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of labor, free choice of occupation and profession. Involuntary labor shall be permitted
only by a court sentence or in the conditions of a state of emergency or martial law.
2. Everyone has the right to working conditions that meet the requirements of safety and hygiene, to remuneration for work without
any discrimination, as well as to social protection against unemployment.
3. The right to individual and collective labor disputes using the methods for resolving them, established by law, including the right
to strike, shall be recognized.
4. Everyone shall have the right to rest. Working labor agreements specifying the length of working time, days off and holidays, and
paid annual leave shall be guaranteed by law.
Article 25
1. The right to housing shall be inviolable. Deprivation of housing shall not be permitted unless otherwise stipulated by a court
judgment. Entry into housing, its inspection and search shall be permitted only in certain cases and according to the procedure
stipulated by law.
2. Provisions to provide citizens with housing in the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be created. Citizens in need of housing shall be
categorized in a manner, to be prescribed by law and provided with housing at an affordable price from the state housing funds in
accordance with the norms stipulated by law.
Article 26
1. Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall privately own any legally acquired property.
2. The property, including the right of inheritance, shall be guaranteed by law.
3. No one may be deprived of his property unless otherwise stipulated by a court judgment. Forcible alienation of property for public
use in extraordinary cases specified by law shall be exercised on condition of its equivalent compensation.4. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of entrepreneurial activity, and free use of property for any legal entrepreneurial activity.
Monopolistic activity shall be regulated and limited by law. Unfair competition shall be prohibited.
Article 27
1. Marriage and family, motherhood, fatherhood, and childhood shall be under the protection of the state.
2. Care and upbringing of children shall be a natural right and responsibility of parents.
3. Adult, able-bodied children must take care of their disabled parents.
Article 28
1. A citizen of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be guaranteed a minimum wage and pension, and guaranteed social security in old
age, in case of disease, disability or loss of the main income-provider and other legal grounds.
2. Voluntary social insurance, the creation of additional forms of social security, and charity shall be encouraged.
Article 29
1. Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall have the right to protection of health.
2. Citizens of the Republic shall be entitled to free, guaranteed, extensive medical assistance established by law.
3. Paid medical treatment shall be provided by state and private medical institutions, as well as by people engaged in private
medical practice on terms and according to the terms and procedures stipulated by law.
Article 30
1. Citizens shall be guaranteed free secondary education in state educational establishments. Secondary education shall be
obligatory.
2. A citizen shall have the right to obtain a higher education on a competitive basis in a state higher educational institution.
3. Fee-based education in private educational institutions shall be carried out on the grounds and in the manner prescribed by law.
4. The state shall set uniform compulsory standards in education. The activity of any educational institution must comply with these
standards.
Article 31
1. The state shall aim to protect the environment in favour of human life and health.
2. Officials shall be held accountable for the concealment of facts and circumstances endangering the life and health of the people
in accordance with the law.
Article 32
Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall have the right to assemble peacefully and without weapons, hold meetings, campaigns
and demonstrations, street processions and pickets. The use of this right may be restricted by law in the interests of state security,
public order, and protection of health, rights, and the freedom of other persons.
Article 33
1. Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall have the right to participate in the government of the state’s affairs directly and
through their representatives, to address personally as well as to direct individual and collective appeals to public and local self-
administrative bodies.
2. Citizens of the Republic shall have the right to elect and be elected into public and local self-administration as well as to
participate in an all-nation referendum.
3. The right to elect and be elected, to participate in the all-nation referendum shall not extend to those citizens judged incapable by
a court as well as those held in places of confinement upon a court’s sentence.
4. Citizens of the Republic shall have an equal right to serve in public office. The requirements for candidates for public offices shall
be conditioned only by the character of the duties of the office and shall be established by law.Article 34
1. Everyone must observe the Constitution, legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan and respect the rights, freedoms, honor, and
dignity of other people.
2. Everyone must appreciate the state symbols of the Republic.
Article 35
Payment of legally established taxes, fees, and other obligatory payments shall be a duty and responsibility of everyone.
Article 36
1. Defense of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be a sacred duty and responsibility of its every citizen.
2. Citizens of the Republic shall perform military service according to the procedure and in the forms established by law.
Article 37
Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan must care for the protection of historical and cultural heritage, and preserve monuments of
history and culture.
Article 38
Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan must preserve nature and protect natural resources.
Article 39
1. Rights and freedoms of an individual and citizen may be limited only by law and only to the extent necessary for the protection of
the constitutional system, defense of public order, human rights and freedoms, and the health and morality of the population.
2. Any acts capable of violating inter-ethnic and inter-religious harmony shall be recognized as unconstitutional.
3. Restriction of the rights and freedoms of citizens for political reasons shall not be allowed in any form. The rights and freedoms
provided for by articles 11, 13–15, paragraph 1 of article 16, article 17, article 19, article 22, paragraph 2 of article 26 of the
Constitution, are not subject to limitation in any case.
Section III. The President
Article 40
1. The President of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be the head of the state, holder of the highest office determining the main
guidelines of the domestic and foreign policy of the state and representing Kazakhstan within the country and in international
relations.
2. The President of the Republic shall be a symbol and guarantor of the unity of the people and state power, the inviolability of
the Constitution, the rights and freedoms of person and citizen.
3. The President of the Republic ensures the coordinated functioning of all branches of government and the responsibility of the
authorities to the people.
Article 41
1. The President of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be elected in accordance with the constitutional law by adult citizens of the
Republic on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot for a term of five years.
2. A citizen of the Republic by birth who is at least forty years old, fluent in the state language, has lived in Kazakhstan for the last
fifteen years and has a higher education, may be elected President of the Republic of Kazakhstan. The constitutional law may
establish additional requirements for candidates for the President of the Republic.
3. Regular elections of the President of the Republic shall be held on the first Sunday of December and shall not coincide with the
election of a new Parliament of the Republic.
3-1. Extraordinary presidential elections shall be assigned by the decision of the President of the Republic and shall be held in
accordance with the procedure and terms established by the Constitutional Law.
4. Excluded by Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 284 dated October 7, 19985. A candidate who receives more than fifty percent of the votes cast by voters who have taken part in the voting shall be
considered elected. In the event that none of the candidates receives the specified number of votes, a second vote shall be taken,
in which two candidates who receive the largest number of votes participate. A candidate is considered to be elected if he receives
a greater number of votes of the voters who took part in the voting.
Article 42
1. The President of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall take office from the moment of swearing to the people the following oath: "I
solemnly swear that I will faithfully serve the people of Kazakhstan, strictly observe the Constitution and the laws of the Republic of
Kazakhstan, guarantee the rights and freedoms of citizens and honestly perform the high duties of the President of the Republic of
Kazakhstan entrusted to me."
2. The oath shall be taken on the second Wednesday of January in a ceremonial atmosphere in the presence of the deputies
of Parliament, the members of the Constitutional Council, the judges of the Supreme Court, as well as all former Presidents of the
Republic. In the case, stipulated by article 48 of the Constitution, the person who assumes the powers of the President of the
Republic of Kazakhstan shall take the oath within one month from the day of assumption of the powers of the President of the
Republic.
3. The powers of the President of the Republic shall terminate from the moment the newly -elected President of the Republic takes
office as well as in the case of early discharge from office, resignation or death. All former Presidents of the Republic, except those
who were discharged from office, shall have the title of ex-President of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
4. Excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 284 dated October 7, 1998.
5. The same person may not be elected to the office of the President of the Republic more than two times in a row.
This restriction shall not apply to the First President of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
Article 43
1. The President of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall not have the right to be a deputy of a representative body, occupy other paid
positions nor engage in entrepreneurial activity.
2. Excluded by Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 254 dated May 21, 2007.
Article 44
1. The President of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall:
1) annually address the people of Kazakhstan with a message on the state of the country and the main guidelines of the domestic
and foreign policy of the Republic of Kazakhstan;
2) appoint regular and special elections to the Parliament of the Republic and its Chambers; convene the first session of Parliament
and take the oath of its deputies to the people of Kazakhstan; convene an extraordinary session of Parliament; sign the law
submitted by the Senate of Parliament within one month, promulgate the law or returns the law or some of its articles for further
discussion and voting;
3) after consultations with factions of political parties represented in the Mazhilis of the Parliament, submit the candidacy of the
Prime Minister of the Republic to the Mazhilis for approval; with the consent of the Mazhilis of the Parliament appoint the position of
the Prime Minister of the Republic; dismiss the Prime Minister of the Republic; determine the structure of the Government upon the
proposal of the Prime Minister; appoint members of the Government to office upon the recommendation of the Prime Minister, made
after consultation with the Mazhilis of the Parliament; independently appoint ministers of foreign affairs, defense, internal affairs;
dismiss members of the Government; take the oath of Government members; if necessary, preside at Governmental meetings on
particularly important issues; repeal or suspend, in whole or in part, the acts of akims of regions, cities of republican significance
and the capital;
4) appoint the Chairperson of the National Bank, the Prosecutor General and the Chairperson of the Committee of National Security
of the Republic with the consent of the Senate of Parliament with the Parliament's consent; discharge them from office;
5) create, abolish and reorganize national bodies that are directly subordinate and accountable to the President of the Republic,
6) appoint and recall the heads of diplomatic representative offices of the Republic;
7) appoint the Chairperson and two members of the Central Election Commission, the Chairperson and two members of the
Accounts Committee for Control over Implementation of the Republican Budget for a five-year term;
8) Excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 51-VI dated March 10, 2017 (shall be applied from the date of its first
official publication).
9) Excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 51-VI dated March 10, 2017 (shall be applied from the date of its first
official publication).
10) adopt a resolution on the conduct of the national referendum;
10-1) send an appeal to the Constitutional Council on consideration of an enacted law or other legal act on compliance with
the Constitution of the Republic in the interests of protecting the rights and freedoms of person and citizen, ensuring nationalsecurity, sovereignty and integrity of the state, on giving an opinion in the case provided for in paragraph 3 of Article 91 of the
Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan;
11) conduct negotiations and sign international agreements of the Republic; sign ratification instruments; letters of credentials and
recall from diplomatic and other representatives of foreign states accredited to him;
12) act as the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Republic, appoint and discharge the highest command of the Armed
Forces from office;
13) award state decorations of the Republic; confer honorary, highest military and other ranks, ranked positions, diplomatic ranks
and qualification degrees;
14) resolve issues of citizenship of the Republic, and granting of political asylum;
15) exercise the pardon of citizens;
16) take measures dictated by the above circumstances including the imposition of a state of emergency on the entire territory and
in particular areas of Kazakhstan, and immediately inform the Parliament of the use of the Armed Forces of the Republic in case of
a serious and immediate threat to the democratic institutions of the Republic, its independence and territorial integrity, political
stability of the Republic, security of its citizens and the disruption of normal functioning of the Constitutional bodies of the state, after
official consultations with the Prime Minister and Chairpersons of the Parliamentary Chambers of the Republic;
17) the President shall impose martial law on the entire territory of the Republic or in particular areas, declare a partial or total
mobilization and immediately inform the Parliament of the Republic in case of aggression against the Republic or immediate
external threat to its security;
18) form the State Security Service subordinate to him;
19) appoint to and discharge the State Secretary of the Republic of Kazakhstan from office, determine his status and powers; form
the Administration of the President of the Republic;
20) form the Security Council and other consultative and advisory bodies as well as the Assembly of People of Kazakhstan and the
Supreme Judicial Council;
21) exercise other powers in accordance with the Constitution and the laws of the Republic.
Article 45
1. The President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, on the basis of and for the exercise of the Constitution and the laws, shall issue
decrees and resolutions which are binding on the entire territory of the Republic.
2. Excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 51-VI dated March 10, 2017 (shall be applied from the date of its first
official publication).
3. Acts of Parliament, signed by the President of the Republic, as well as acts of the President, issued on the initiative of
the Government, shall be preliminarily affixed accordingly by the signature of the Chairperson of each Chamber of Parliament or the
Prime Minister, who are legally responsible for the legality of these acts.
Article 46
1. The President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, his honor and dignity shall be inviolable.
2. Provision, service, and guard of the President of the Republic and his family shall be carried out at the state's expense.
3. The provisions of this article shall apply to ex-Presidents of the Republic.
4. The status and powers of the First President of Kazakhstan shall be determined by the Constitution of the Republic and
Constitutional Law.
Article 47
1. The President of the Republic of Kazakhstan may be prematurely discharged from office in the case of continued incapacity to
carry out his duties due to illness. In this case, the Parliament shall form a commission consisting of equal numbers of deputies from
each Chamber and specialists in the corresponding areas of medicine. The decision on early discharge shall be adopted at a joint
sitting of the Parliament's Chambers by the majority of not less than three quarters of the total number of deputies of each Chamber
on the grounds of opinion of the commission and the Constitutional Council on compliance with the established constitutional
procedures.
2. The President of the Republic shall bear responsibility for the actions performed while carrying out his duties and only in the case
of high treason may be discharged from office by Parliament. The decision to bring an accusation and conduct its investigation may
be adopted by the majority of the deputies of the Mazhilis at the initiative of no less, than one-third of the total number of its
deputies. Investigation of the accusation shall be organized by the Senate and its results shall be transferred for consideration by
the majority of votes of the total number of the deputies of the Senate at a joint session of the Parliament's Chambers. The final
decision on this issue shall be adopted at a joint sitting of the Chambers of Parliament by a majority of not less than three-quarters
of the total number of the deputies of each Chamber provided that the Supreme Court concludes that on the validity of the
accusation and conclusion of the Constitutional Council on compliance with the established constitutional procedures. The failure to
make a final decision within two months from the moment of the accusation shall result in recognition of the rejection of theallegation against the President of the Republic. The rejection of the accusation against the President of the Republic in the
commission of high treason at any stage shall result in early termination of the powers of the deputies of the Mazhilis, who initiated
the consideration of this issue.
3. The issue of discharge of the President of the Republic from office may not be commenced within the period of consideration by
him of the issue of early termination of the powers of Parliament of the Republic or the Mazhilis of Parliament.
Article 48
1. In case of early discharge or impeachment of the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan from office as well as in the case of his
death, the powers of the President of the Republic shall be transmitted for the remaining period to the Chairperson of the Senate of
Parliament; if the Chairperson of the Senate is unable to assume the powers of the President, they shall pass to the Chairperson of
the Mazhilis of Parliament; if the Chairperson of the Mazhilis is unable to assume the powers of the President, they shall pass to the
Prime Minister of the Republic. A person who has assumed the powers of the President of the Republic, shall resign himself from
the powers of the Chairperson of the Senate, the Chairperson of the Mazhilis and the Prime Minister. In this case, the filling of
vacant public positions shall be carried out in the manner prescribed by the Constitution.
2. A person who has assumed the authority of the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, on the grounds and in the manner
provided by paragraph 1 of this article, shall not have the right to initiate changes and additions to the Constitution of the Republic of
Kazakhstan.
Section IV. Parliament
Article 49
1. The Parliament of the Republic of Kazakhstan is the highest representative body of the Republic exercising legislative power.
2. Parliament's powers shall begin from the opening of its first session and terminate with the first session of the Parliament of a
new convocation.
3. The powers of Parliament may be terminated early in cases and as stipulated by the Constitution.
4. Constitutional Law shall determine the organization and activity of Parliament as well as the legal status of its deputies.
Article 50
1. The Parliament shall consist of two Chambers: the Senate and the Mazhilis, which act on a permanent basis.
2. The Senate shall be composed of deputies in the procedure stipulated by Constitutional Law: represented by two individuals from
each region, city of republic significance, and the capital of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Fifteen deputies of the Senate shall be
assigned by the President of the Republic, accounting for the need to provide in the Senate for representation of national, cultural
and other significant interests of the society.
3. The Mazhilis shall consist of one hundred and seven deputies elected in the procedure established by Constitutional Law.
4. A deputy of Parliament may not be a member of both Chambers at the same time.
5. The term of powers of the Senate’s deputies shall be six years, and the term of the deputies of the Mazhilis shall be five years.
Article 51
1. Election of the ninety-eight deputies of the Mazhilis shall be carried out by the universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret
ballot. Nine deputies of the Mazhilis shall be elected by the Assembly of the People of Kazakhstan. Regular elections of the
deputies of the Mazhilis shall be held no later than two months before the expiry of the term of powers of the current Parliament
convocation.
2. The election of deputies of the Senate shall be carried out on the basis of indirect suffrage by secret ballot. Half of the elected
deputies of the Senate shall be re-elected every three years. In this case, their regular elections shall be held no later than two
months before the expiry of their term of office.
3. Extraordinary elections of the deputies of Parliament or the Mazhilis of Parliament shall be held within two months from the day of
early termination of the powers of Parliament or the Mazhilis of Parliament respectively.
4. A deputy of Parliament may be a person who is a citizen of the Republic of Kazakhstan and who has been a permanent resident
for the last ten years on its territory. A deputy of the Senate may be a person who has reached thirty years of age, has a higher
education and length of service of not less than five years, and has been a permanent resident for not less than three years on the
territory of the respective region, city of republic significance or the capital of the Republic. A deputy of the Mazhilis may be a
person who has reached twenty-five years of age.
5. Constitutional Law shall regulate elections of the deputies of the Parliament of the Republic.
6. A deputy of Parliament shall take an oath before the people of Kazakhstan.Article 52
1. Excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated No. 254 dated May 21, 2007 (shall be applied from the date of its
official publication).
2. Deputies of Parliament are obliged to take part in its work. Voting in Parliament shall be carried out by the deputy only in person.
The absence of a deputy without a clear reason at meetings of the Chambers and their bodies more than three times, as well as the
transfer of the right to vote, entails the application to the deputy of statutory measures of punishment.
3. A deputy of Parliament shall not have the right to be a deputy of another representative body, occupy other paid positions, except
teaching, research, and creative activities, be engaged in entrepreneurial activity, be a member of a governing body or a
supervisory board of a commercial organization. Violation of this rule shall entail the termination of a deputy's powers.
4. A deputy of Parliament during the term of his office may not be arrested, subject to detention, measures of administrative
punishment imposed judicially, charged with criminal liability without the consent of a respective Chamber except for cases of being
detained at the scene of a crime or the commission of serious crimes.
5. The powers of a deputy of the Parliament shall be terminated in cases of resignation, death, being recognized as incapable, dead
or untraceable by a valid judgment of the court, and in other cases stipulated by the Constitution and the Constitutional Law.
A deputy of the Parliament shall be deprived of his mandate in cases of:
1) his departure for permanent residence beyond the Republic of Kazakhstan;
2) the entry into force against him of a conviction rendered by a court;
3) loss of citizenship of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
A deputy of the Mazhilis of Parliament shall be deprived of his mandate in cases of:
1) withdrawal or expulsion of a deputy from a political party, from which, in accordance with constitutional law, he has been elected;
2) termination of a political party, from which, in accordance with constitutional law, he has been elected.
The powers of appointed deputies of the Senate of Parliament may be terminated early by the decision of the President of the
Republic.
The powers of the deputies of Parliament and the Mazhilis of Parliament shall be terminated early in cases of dissolution of
Parliament and the Mazhilis of Parliament respectively.
6. Preparation of issues concerning the application of penalty measures to the deputies, their compliance with the requirements of
item 3 of this article, rules of deputy ethics, as well as termination of the deputies' powers and deprivation of their powers and
deputy inviolability, shall be imposed by the Central Election Commission of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
Article 53
Parliament at a joint session of the Chambers shall:
1) introduce amendments and supplements to the Constitution pursuant to the proposal of the President of the Republic of
Kazakhstan;
1-1) adopts constitutional laws;
1-2) holds a second discussion and vote on constitutional laws or articles of the constitutional law that have raised objections of the
President of the Republic, within one month from the date of sending objections. Failure to comply with this deadline means
acceptance of the President's objections. If the Parliament, by a three-quarters majority of the total number of deputies of each
Chamber, overcomes the objections of the President, the President signs the constitutional law within one month. If the President's
objections are not overcome, the constitutional law is considered rejected or adopted in the wording proposed by the President;
2) approve the reports of the Government and the Accounts Committee for Control over Implementation of Republican Budget on
the implementation of the national budget. Failure to approve the report of the Government on the execution of the Republican
Budget by Parliament means that the Parliament expresses a vote of no confidence in the Government;
3) Excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No.51-VI dated March 10, 2017 (shall be applied from the date of its first
official publication).);
4) take a decision on war and peace issues;
5) take the decision to use the Armed Forces of the Republic pursuant to the proposal of the President of the Republic to fulfil
international obligations for the maintenance of peace and security;
6) grant a hearing of annual messages of the Constitutional Council on the state of the constitutional legality in the Republic;
7) form joint commissions of the Chambers, elect and release their chairpersons from office, hear reports on the activity of the
commissions;
8) exercise other powers assigned to the Parliament by the Constitution.Article 54
1. Parliament at a separate session of the Chambers through consecutive consideration of issues first in the Mazhilis and then in
the Senate shall adopt constitutional and other laws as well as:
1) Approve the national budget and make amendments and supplements thereto;
2) Establish and annul state taxes and dues;
3) Establish the rules for resolution of issues related to the administrative and territorial structure of the Republic of Kazakhstan;
4) Institute state awards, honorary, military and other titles, ranked positions, diplomatic ranks of the Republic of Kazakhstan, and
determine state symbols of the Republic;
5) resolve issues of state loans and economic and other assistance granted by the Republic of Kazakhstan;
6) Resolve amnesty issues;
7) Ratify and denounce international treaties of the Republic.
2. The Parliament at a separate session of the Chambers through consecutive consideration of issues first in the Mazhilis and then
in the Senate shall:
1) Discuss the National Budget Performance Report;
2) if a law or an article of the law gives rise to objections by the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, Parliament shall hold a
repeated discussion and voting on the laws or articles of the law within a month from the day of the submission of any objections.
Failure to comply with this term shall indicate acceptance of the President’s objections. If the Mazhilis and the Senate by a majority
of two thirds of the total deputies of each Chamber approve the earlier decision, the President shall sign the law within a month. If
neither of the two Chambers votes against the President's objections, the law shall be deemed either rejected or adopted in the
wording proposed by the President. If the Head of State has any objections to constitutional laws adopted by the Parliament, these
shall be considered in the procedure stipulated by this sub-item. If the President has objections to the constitutional laws, these may
be rejected by a vote of at least three quarters of the total membership of each chamber.
3) Initiate the national referendum.
Article 55
The following shall be the exclusive responsibility of the Senate:
1) Election and release from office of the Chairperson of the Supreme Court and judges of the Supreme Court of the Republic of
Kazakhstan upon the recommendation of the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, and swearing them into office;
1-1) election of The Human Rights Commissioner in Kazakhstan for a five-year term and his release from office upon the
recommendation of the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan;
2) approval of the President’s nominees for Chairperson of the National Bank, Prosecutor General and the Chairperson of the
National Security Committee of the Republic of Kazakhstan;
3) removal of immunity of the Prosecutor General, the Chairperson and judges of the Supreme Court of the Republic;
4) has been excluded pursuant to the RoK Law dated May 21, 2007 N 254, (is enacted from the date of its official publishing);
5) performance of the Parliament’s functions with regard to adoption of constitutional and other laws, when the Mazhilis is absent
due to the early termination of its powers;
6) performance of other powers that have been conferred upon the Senate by the Constitution.
Article 56
1. The following shall be the exclusive responsibility of the Mazhilis:
1) The decision to consider draft constitutional and other laws submitted to Parliament and the consideration of such laws.;
2) acceptance of the President's candidate for Prime Minister by a majority vote of the total number of deputies of the Chamber.;
3) Announcement of the regular Presidential elections in the Republic;
3-1) hearing twice a year the report of the Chairman of the Supreme Audit Chamber;
4) performance of other powers that have been conferred upon the Mazhilis by the Constitution.
2. Upon the proposal of at least one fifth of its total membership, the Mazhilis is empowered to adopt by a simple majority of its total
membership, a vote of no confidence in the Government.
Article 57
Each of the Parliament Chambers shall independently, without participation from the other Chamber:
1) appoint two members of the Constitutional Council; appoint two members of the Central Election Commission for a five-year
term; and appoint three members of the Accounts Committee for Control over Implementation of the Republican Budget;2) delegate half of the members of the commission formed by Parliament in the case provided for in Article 47.1 of the Constitution;
3) elect half the members of joint commissions of the Chambers;
4) terminate the powers of the Chambers’ deputies, and upon recommendation of the Prosecutor General of the Republic of
Kazakhstan, resolves the issues of their immunity removal;
5) hold Parliamentary hearings on the issues of its responsibilities;
6) have the right, on the initiative of a vote by at least one third of the total membership, to hear the reports of the Government on
their performance. After the hearings, a majority of at least two-thirds vote of the total membership of the Chamber, is entitled to
adopt the request of the President of the Republic to remove from office the member of the Government who failed to comply with
the legislation of the Republic. The President shall then dismiss that member.
7) establish the coordinating and working bodies of the Chambers;
8) adopt the regulations of their activities, other decisions on the issues of the Chamber structure and the internal code of conduct.
Article 58
1. The Chambers shall be headed by their chairpersons, who are elected by the Senate and the Mazhilis from among the deputies
who are fluent in the state language, by a secret vote of a majority of the total membership. The Senate Chairperson shall be
nominated by the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan. The Mazhilis Chairperson shall be nominated by the Chamber deputies.
2. The Chairpersons of the Chambers may be released from office and are entitled to submit their resignation by way of a majority
vote by the Chambers.
3. The Chairpersons of Parliament's Chambers shall:
1) convene and chair sessions of the Chambers;
2) exercise general supervision of the issues subject to consideration by the Chambers;
3) nominate the Deputy Chairs of the Chambers;
4) ensure the respect for the regulations by Chambers in their activity;
5) supervise the activity of the coordinating bodies of the Chambers;
6) sign acts issued by the Chambers;
7) nominate the members of the Constitutional Council, the Central Election Commission and the Accounts Committee for Control
over Implementation of the Republican Budget;
8) comply with other duties entrusted by the Regulation of Parliament.
4. The Mazhilis Chairperson shall:
1) open the sessions of Parliament;
2) convene regular joint sessions of the Chambers and chair the regular and extraordinary joint sessions of the Chambers.
5. The Chairpersons of the Chambers shall issue instructions on the matters of their responsibility.
Article 59
1. Parliamentary sessions shall proceed in the form of joint and separate sessions of the Chambers.
2. The President of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall convene the first session no later than thirty days after the election results are
published.
3. The regular sessions of the Parliament shall be held once a year from the first business day of September to the last business
day of June.
4. Generally the session of Parliament shall be opened by the President of the Republic and closed at joint sessions of the Senate
and Mazhilis. During the intersession period, the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, either on his own initiative, or at the
suggestion of one of the Chairpersons or at least one-third of the total membership of the Parliament, is entitled to convene an
extraordinary session of Parliament. Only the issues that were the reason for the convocation shall be considered at this session.
5. Joint and individual sessions of the Chambers shall be held if at least two-thirds of the total membership of each Chamber are
present.
6. Joint and individual sessions of the Chambers shall be open. If provided for by the regulations, the session may be held behind
closed doors. The President of the Republic, the Prime Minister and members of the Government, the Chair of the National Bank,
the Prosecutor General, and the Chairperson of the National Security Committee shall have the right to be present at any session
and be heard.Article 60
1. The Chambers shall establish standing committees with at least seven members in each Chamber.
2. The Senate and Mazhilis shall have the right to establish joint commissions in equal numbers to resolve the issues related to their
joint activities.
3. The committees and commissions shall issue resolutions on the matters of their responsibility.
4. The law shall govern the procedure of the establishment of these committees, their powers and workflow management.
Article 61
1. The President of the Republic, the Deputies of Parliament and the Government shall have the right of a legislative initiative which
shall be realized only in the Mazhilis.
2. The President of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall have the right to determine priority consideration of draft laws which means
that the draft law shall be adopted as a matter of urgency within two months.
Draft laws introduced as a legislative initiative of the Government of the Republic in order to promptly respond to conditions that
pose a threat to the life and health of the population, the constitutional order, the protection of public order, and the economic
security of the country, are subject to consideration by the Parliament immediately at a joint session of its Chambers.
3. Parliament shall have the right to issue laws that regulate the most important public relations and establish fundamental
principles and standards relating to:
1) the legal capacity of individuals and legal entities, civil freedoms and rights, and the obligations and responsibilities of individuals
and legal entities;
2) the system of ownership and other real property rights;
3) the basis of the organization and activities of central and local government bodies and of civil and military service;
4) taxation and the application of fees and other mandatory charges;
5) the republican budget;
6) issues of the judicial system and legal proceedings;
7) education, health care and social provisions;
8) the privatization of enterprises and their property;
9) environmental protection;
10) the administrative and territorial structure of the Republic;
11) national defence and security.
All other issues are covered by local by-laws.
In the case of the introduction of draft laws to the Parliament provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article, the Government of the
Republic has the right to adopt, under its responsibility, temporary regulatory legal acts having the force of law on the issues
specified in part one of this paragraph, which are valid until the entry into force of laws adopted by the Parliament or until the
Parliament does not adopt laws.
4. If the Mazhilis consider and adopt draft law by a majority vote of the total number of its deputies, this draft law shall be submitted
to the Senate for consideration within not more than sixty days. If the Senate by majority vote of the total number of its deputies
agrees with the proposed draft law, the law shall be deemed to be adopted, subject to the submission to the President for signing. If
Senate reject the draft law by majority vote of the total number of its deputies, this draft law shall be returned to the Mazhilis. If the
Mazhilis, by the majority vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies, agrees with the draft law once again, this draft law shall
be submitted to the Senate for a second discussion and voting. A twice-rejected draft law may not be submitted again during the
same session.
5. Amendments and supplements to a draft law proposed by Senate by the majority vote of the total number of its deputies, shall be
sent to the Mazhilis. If the Mazhilis by the majority vote of the total number of its deputies agree with the proposed amendments and
supplements, the law shall be deemed to be adopted. If the Mazhilis by the same majority vote rejects the amendments and
supplements proposed by the Senate by the same majority vote, the disagreement between the Chambers shall be resolved
through conciliatory procedures.
5-1. If the Mazhilis consider and adopt the draft constitutional law by at least two-thirds vote of the total number of its deputies, this
draft law shall be submitted to the Senate for consideration within not more than sixty days. If the Senate adopt the draft by at least
a two-thirds vote of the total number of its deputies, then the constitutional law shall be deemed adopted and is subject to
submission to the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan within ten days for signing. The Mazhilis or the Senate may reject the
draft constitutional law as a whole by a majority vote of the total number of the deputies of the Chamber. The amendments and
supplements to a draft constitutional law proposed by Senate by the two-thirds vote of its deputies, shall be sent to the Mazhilis. If
the Mazhilis by the two thirds vote of its deputies agrees with the proposed amendments and supplements, the constitutional law
shall be deemed to be adopted. If the Mazhilis by the same majority vote rejects the amendments and supplements proposed by
the Senate, the disagreement between the Chambers shall be resolved through conciliatory procedures.6. The draft laws that provide for the reduction of state revenues or increase in state expenditures may only be submitted when
there is a positive resolution of the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan. This resolution shall not be required with respect to
the draft laws that are subject to consideration by the Mazhilis of the Parliament as part of the legislative initiative of the President of
the Republic of Kazakhstan.
7. If the draft law submitted by the Government has not been adopted, the Prime- Minister shall have the right to raise an issue of
confidence in the Government at a joint session of the Chambers. The voting on this issue shall be held no earlier than forty-eight
hours from the moment of calling for a vote of confidence. If the call for a vote of confidence does not receive the majority vote of
the total number of deputies of each Chambers, a draft law shall be deemed to be adopted without voting. However, the
Government may not exercise this right more than twice a year.
Article 62
1. The Parliament adopts legislative acts in the form of laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan, resolutions of Parliament, and
resolutions of the Senate and the Mazhilis which are binding throughout the territory of the Republic.
2. The laws of the Republic come into force after the President of the Republic signs them.
3. Amendments and additions to the Constitution shall be made by a majority of at least three-quarters of the votes of the total
number of deputies in each Chamber.
4. Constitutional laws shall be adopted on issues stipulated by the Constitution by a majority of at least two-thirds of the votes of the
total number of deputies of each Chamber.
5. Legislative acts of Parliament and its Chambers shall be adopted by a majority vote of the total number of deputies of the
Chambers, unless otherwise provided by the Constitution.
6. At least two readings on the introduction of amendments and additions to the Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be
conducted.
7. Laws of the Republic and resolutions of Parliament and its Chambers shall not contradict the Constitution. Resolutions of
Parliament and its Chambers should not contradict the laws.
8. The order of development, presentation, discussion, enactment and publication of legislative and other regulatory legal acts of
the Republic shall be governed by the special law and regulation of Parliament and its Chambers.
Article 63
1. The President of the Republic, after consulting with the chairpersons of the Chambers of Parliament and the Prime Minister, may
dissolve Parliament or the Mazhilis of Parliament.
2. The Parliament and Mazhilis of the Parliament cannot be dissolved during a state of emergency or martial law, or during the last
six months of the office of the President, or within one year of the previous dissolution.
Section V. Government
Article 64
1. The Government exercises the executive power of the Republic of Kazakhstan, heads the system of executive bodies and
manages their activities.
2. The Government is a collegial body and within its activities is accountable to the President of the Republic and Parliament.
3. The members of the Government are accountable to the Chambers of Parliament in the case provided for in subparagraph 6)
of Article 57 of the Constitution.
4. The competence, organization and activities of the Government are determined by constitutional law.
Article 65
1. The Government is formed by the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan in the manner prescribed by the Constitution.
2. Proposals on the structure and composition of the Government shall be made to the President of the Republic by the Prime
Minister of the Republic within ten days of the appointment of the Prime Minister.
3. Government members take an oath to the people and the President of Kazakhstan.Article 66
The Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan:
1) develops the main directions of social and economic policy of the state, its defense, security and public order, and organizes their
implementation; approves the state programmes in coordination with the President of the Republic, and also ensures their
implementation;
2) submits to Parliament the republican budget along with a report on its execution, and ensures execution of the budget;
3) submits draft laws to the Mazhilis and ensures implementation of laws;
4) organizes the management of state property;
5) develops measures for the conduct of the foreign policy of the Republic;
6) manages the activities of ministries, state committees, and other central and local executive bodies;
7) has the power to cancel or suspend, either in whole or in part, the actions of ministries, state committees, or other central and
local executive bodies of the Republic;
8) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 10.03.2017 No. 51-VI (shall be enforced from the date of its first
official publication);
9) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 07.10.1998 No. 284;
9-1) by an agreement with the President of the Republic, approves a unified system of financing and remunerating employees for all
bodies maintained at the expense of the state budget;
10) performs other functions assigned to it by the Constitution, laws and acts of the President.
Article 67
The Prime Minister of the Republic of Kazakhstan:
1) organizes and manages the activities of the Government, and is personally responsible for its work;
2) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 21.05.2007 No. 254 (shall be enforced from the date of its official
publication);
3) signs orders of the Government;
4) reports to the President and Parliament on the main activities of the Government and on all its major decisions;
5) performs other functions related to the organization and management of the Government.
Article 68
1. Government members are independent in making decisions within their competence and are personally accountable to the Prime
Minister of the Republic for the work of state bodies subordinate to them. A member of the Government who does not agree with
the policy pursued by the Government or does not implement it should resigns or will be dismissed.
2. Government members may not be deputies of a representative body, occupy other paid positions, except for teaching, scientific
or other creative activities carry out entrepreneurial activities, or be part of the governing body or supervisory board of a commercial
organization, except when it is their job in accordance with the law.
Article 69
1. The Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan, within matters of its competence, issues decrees that are binding throughout the
territory of the Republic.
2. The Prime Minister of the Republic shall issue binding orders on the entire territory of the Republic.
3. Government decrees and orders of the Prime Minister should not contradict the Constitution, legislative acts, or decrees and
orders of the President of the Republic.
Article 70
1. The Government shall resign its powers to the newly elected Mazhilis of the Parliament of the Republic.
2. The Government and any member thereof shall have the right to declare to the President of the Republic that they will resign if
they consider it impossible to continue to perform the functions assigned to them.
3. The Government shall declare its resignation to the President of the Republic if the Mazhilis of the Parliament or the Parliament
expresses a vote of no confidence in the Government.
4. The President of the Republic shall, within ten days, consider accepting or rejecting the resignation.5. Acceptance of a resignation means termination of the authority of the Government or its respective member. Accepting the
resignation of the Prime Minister means the termination of powers of the entire Government.
6. If the resignation of the Government or its member is rejected, the President will entrust it or its member with the further
implementation of its duties.
7. The President of the Republic has the right, on his own initiative, to decide on the termination of the powers of the Government
and to release any member from their position. The release of the Prime Minister from office means the termination of powers of the
entire Government.
Section VI. Constitutional Council
Article 71
1. The Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan consists of seven members, whose powers last six years. Life
members of the Constitutional Council are ex-Presidents of the Republic.
2. The Chairperson of the Constitutional Council is appointed by the President of the Republic, and in the event of a split of votes
equally, his vote is decisive.
3. Two members of the Constitutional Council are appointed by the President of the Republic and two members of the
Constitutional Council are appointed by the Senate and the Mazhilis, respectively.
Half the members of the Constitutional Council are renewed every three years.
4. The position of the Chairperson and member of the Constitutional Council is incompatible with the deputy mandate, the
occupation of other paid positions except for teaching, scientific or other creative; or entrepreneurial activities, membership in the
governing body or supervisory board of a commercial organization.
5. The Chairperson and members of the Constitutional Council during their term of office may not be arrested, subjected to
detention, administrative measures imposed in court, or brought to criminal responsibility without the consent of Parliament, except
in cases of detention at the crime scene or committing serious crimes.
6. The organization and activities of the Constitutional Council are governed by constitutional law.
Article 72
1. The Constitutional Council, on the appeal of any of the following: the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Chairperson of
the Senate, the Chairperson of the Mazhilis, at least one fifth of the total number of deputies of the Parliament, and the Prime
Minister:
1) decides in the event of a dispute the question of correctness of election conduct of the President of the Republic, the deputies
of Parliament and the conduct of a republican referendum;
2) considers, before they are signed by the President, the laws adopted by the Parliament for their compliance with the Constitution
of the Republic;
2-1) considers, for compliance with the Constitution of the Republic, resolutions adopted by the Parliament and its Chambers;
3) considers, before ratification, the international treaties of the Republic for compliance with their Constitution;
4) gives an official interpretation of the norms of the Constitution;
5) gives conclusions in cases provided for by paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 47 of the Constitution.
2. The Constitutional Council examines the appeals of the President of the Republic in the cases provided for by subparagraph 10-
1) of Article 44 of the Constitution, as well as the appeals of the courts in the cases established by Article 78 of the Constitution.
3. The Constitutional Court, on the appeals of citizens, considers for compliance with the Constitution of the Republic the normative
legal acts of the Republic of Kazakhstan directly affecting their rights and freedoms enshrined in the Constitution.
The procedure and conditions for citizens to apply to the Constitutional Court are determined by the constitutional law.
4. The Constitutional Court, upon the appeals of the Prosecutor General of the Republic, considers the issues specified in sub-
paragraphs 3) and 4) of paragraph 1 of this Article, as well as regulatory legal acts of the Republic of Kazakhstan for their
compliance with the Constitution of the Republic.
5. The Constitutional Court, upon the appeals of the Commissioner for Human Rights, considers normative legal acts affecting the
rights and freedoms of person and citizen enshrined in the Constitution for compliance with the Constitution of the Republic.
Article 73
1. In case of an appeal to the Constitutional Council on issues specified in subparagraph 1) of paragraph 1 of Article 72 of the
Constitution, the entry into the office of the President, the registration of elected deputies of the Parliament or the summing up of the
republican referendum are suspended.2. In case of appeal to the Constitutional Council on the issues specified in subparagraphs 2) and 3) of paragraph 1 of Article 72 of
the Constitution, the time period for signing or ratifying the relevant acts is suspended.
3. The Constitutional Council shall make its decision within one month from the day the application is received. At the request of
the President of the Republic, this period may be shortened to ten days if the issue does not tolerate delay.
4. Excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 10.03.2017 No. 51-VI (shall be enforced from the date of its first official
publication).
Article 74
1. Laws and international treaties recognized as non-compliant with the Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan may not be
signed or, accordingly, ratified and enforced.
2. Laws and other legal acts recognized as unconstitutional, including those that infringe the rights and freedoms of a person and
citizen enshrined in the Constitution, are repealed and shall not be applied.
3. Decisions of the Constitutional Council come into force on the day of their adoption, are generally binding throughout the territory
of the Republic, are final and not subject to appeal.
Section VII. Courts and Justice
Article 75
1. Justice in the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be exercised only by a court.
2. Judicial power is exercised through civil, criminal and other forms of legal proceedings established by law. In cases provided by
law, criminal proceedings are conducted with the participation of jurors.
3. The courts of the Republic are the Supreme Court of the Republic and local and other courts of the Republic established by law.
4. The judicial system of the Republic is established by the Constitution of the Republic and constitutional law. The establishment of
special and emergency courts under any name is not allowed.
Article 76
1. Judicial authority shall be exercised on behalf of the Republic of Kazakhstan and, by its purpose, has the protection of the rights,
freedoms and legitimate interests of citizens and organizations and the enforcement of the Constitution, laws, other normative legal
acts and international treaties of the Republic.
2. The judicial power extends to all cases and disputes arising on the basis of the Constitution, laws, other regulatory legal acts and
international treaties of the Republic.
3. Decisions, sentences and other rulings of the courts are binding throughout the territory of the Republic.
Article 77
1. A judge in the administration of justice is independent and subject only to the Constitution and the law.
2. Any interference with the court’s administration of justice is unacceptable and punishable by law. Judges are not accountable for
specific cases.
3. When applying the law, the judge shall be guided by the following principles:
1) a person is considered to be innocent of committing a crime until his guilt is recognized by the court judgment that has entered
into legal force;
2) no one may be subjected to repeated criminal or administrative liability for the same offense;
3) no one’s court jurisdiction, provided for him by law, can be changed without his consent;
4) everyone has the right to be heard in court;
5) laws that establish or strengthen liability, impose new duties on citizens or worsen their situation, do not have retroactive effect.
If, after committing the offense, the responsibility for it is cancelled or mitigated by law, the new law shall be applied;
6) the accused is not obliged to prove his innocence;
7) no one is obliged to testify against himself, or his spouse (-s) and close relatives, whose circle is determined by law. Priests are
not obliged to testify against those who confided in them at confession;
8) any doubts about the guilt of the person shall be interpreted in favour of the accused;
9) evidence obtained in an unlawful manner is not legally binding. No one can be convicted solely on the basis of his own
confession;10) the application of criminal law by analogy is not allowed.
4. The principles of justice established by the Constitution are common and uniform for all courts and judges of the Republic.
Article 78
The courts are not entitled to apply laws and other regulatory legal acts that infringe the rights and freedoms of a person and
citizen enshrined in the Constitution. If the court finds that the law or other regulatory legal act to be applied infringes upon the rights
and freedoms of a person and citizen enshrined in the Constitution, he is obliged to suspend the proceedings and apply to
the Constitutional Council with a view to declare this act unconstitutional.
Article 79
1. The courts consist of permanent judges whose independence is protected by the Constitution and the law. The powers of a judge
may be terminated or suspended solely on the grounds established by law.
2. A judge may not be arrested, brought in, have administrative measures imposed against him in court or be brought to criminal
responsibility without the consent of the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, based on the opinion of the Supreme Judicial
Council of the Republic, or in the case established by subparagraph 3) of Article 55 of the Constitution, - without the consent of the
Senate, except in cases of detention at the crime scene or committing serious crimes.
3. Requirements for judges of the courts of the Republic shall be determined by constitutional law.
4. The position of a judge is incompatible with the following roles: a deputy’s mandate, the occupation of another paid position
except for teaching, scientific or other creative activities,; entrepreneurial activities, and joining the governing body or supervisory
board of a commercial organization.
Article 80
Funding of courts and the provision of judges with housing is carried out at the expense of the republican budget and should ensure
the possibility of full and independent administration of justice.
Article 81
The Supreme Court of the Republic of Kazakhstan is the highest judicial body in civil, criminal and other cases, jurisdictional, local
and other courts, and in cases stipulated by law it considers cases related to its jurisdiction and gives explanations on matters of
judicial practice.
Article 82
1. The Chairperson and judges of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Kazakhstan are elected by the Senate on the proposal
of the President of the Republic, based on recommendation of the High Judicial Council.
2. The Chairpersons and judges of local and other courts are appointed by the President of the Republic based on the
recommendation of the High Judicial Council.
3. In accordance with constitutional law, judicial panels may be established in courts. The procedure for empowering the
chairpersons of the judicial boards shall be determined by constitutional law.
4. The Supreme Judicial Council consists of the President and other persons appointed by the President of the Republic.
5. The status and organization of work of the High Judicial Council shall be determined by law.
Article 83
1. The Prosecutor’s Office, on behalf of the state and in the limits and forms established by law, supervises the observance of
legality on the territory of the Republic of Kazakhstan, represents the interests of the state in court, and carries out criminal
prosecutions on behalf of the state.
2. The Office of the Public Prosecutor of the Republic shall compile a single centralized system with the subordination of the lower
level prosecutors to the higher and to the Prosecutor General of the Republic. It exercises its authority independently of other state
bodies and officials, and is accountable only to the President of the Republic.
3. The Prosecutor General of the Republic during his term of office may not be arrested, brought to trial, be subject to administrative
measures imposed in court or brought to criminal responsibility without the consent of the Senate, except in cases of detention at
the crime scene or committing serious crimes. The term of office of the Prosecutor General is five years.
4. The competence, organization and procedure of the activities of the General Prosecutor’s Office of the Republic shall be
determined by law.Article 83-1
1. The Commissioner for Human Rights in the Republic of Kazakhstan promotes the restoration of violated human and civil rights
and freedoms, promotes the rights and freedoms of person and citizen.
2. When exercising his powers, the Commissioner for Human Rights is independent and unaccountable to State bodies and
officials.
3. During the term of his/her powers, the Commissioner for Human Rights may not be arrested, subjected to a drive, administrative
penalties imposed in court, brought to criminal responsibility without the consent of the Senate, except in cases of detention at the
scene of a crime or the commission of serious crimes.
4. The legal status and organization of the activities of the Commissioner for Human Rights are determined by the Constitutional
law.
Article 84
Article 84 is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 21.05.2007 No. 254 (shall be enforced from the date of its
official publication).
Section VIII. State Administration and Self-Government
Article 85
Local state administration is carried out by local representatives and executive bodies that are responsible for the state of affairs in
the relevant territory.
Article 86
1. Maslikhats are local representative bodies that express the will of the population and of the respective administrative-territorial
units and, taking into account national interests, determine the measures necessary for its implementation and control their
implementation.
2. Maslikhats shall be elected by the population on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot for a term of five
years.
3. A citizen of the Republic of Kazakhstan who has reached twenty years of age may be elected deputy of the Maslikhat. A citizen
of the Republic may be a deputy of only one Maslikhat.
4. The jurisdiction of Maslikhats includes:
1) the approval of plans, economic and social development programs of the territory and local budgets, and reports on their
execution;
2) the solution of issues related to their jurisdiction of the local administrative-territorial structure;
3) the consideration of reports of the heads of local executive bodies on issues that are referred by law to the competence of the
Maslikhat;
4) the formation of standing commissions and other working bodies of the Maslikhat, the hearing of reports on their activities, and
the solution of other issues related to organization of work in Maslikhat;
5) implementation in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of other powers to ensure the rights and legitimate interests of
citizens.
5. The powers of the Maslikhat may be terminated early by the President of the Republic following consultations with the Prime
Minister and the Presidents of the Chambers of Parliament, as well as if the Maslikhat makes a decision on self-dissolution.
6. The competence of Maslikhats, the order of their organization and activities, and the legal status of their deputies are established
by law.
Article 87
1. Local executive bodies are included in the unified system of executive bodies of the Republic of Kazakhstan, and ensure the
implementation of the state-wide policy of the executive power in combination with the interests and development needs of the
relevant territory.
2. The jurisdiction of local executive bodies includes:
1) the development of plans, economic and social development programs of the territory, and local budget, including ensuring their
implementation;
2) the management of communal property;3) the appointment and dismissal of heads of local executive bodies, and the solution of other issues related to the organization of
work of local executive bodies;
4) the implementation in the interests of the local government of other powers imposed on local executive bodies by the legislation
of the Republic.
3. Each local executive body is headed by the Akim (Mayor) of the relevant administrative and territorial unit, which is the
representative of the President and the Government of the Republic.
4. Akims of regions, cities of republican significance and the capital are appointed by the President of the Republic with the consent
of Maslikhats of regions, cities of republican significance and the capital, respectively. Akims of other administrative-territorial units
shall be appointed or elected to office, as well as dismissed from office in the manner determined by law. The President of the
Republic has the right, at his discretion, to dismiss the Akims from office.
5. On the initiative of at least one-fifth of the total number of Maslikhat deputies, the question of expressing a vote of no confidence
in the Akim may be raised. In this case, the Maslikhat has the right to express no confidence in the Akim by the majority of votes of
the total number of his deputies and raise the question of his release from office to the President of the Republic or the higher Akim,
respectively. Powers of Akims of regions, cities of republican significance and the capital shall be terminated when the newly
elected President of the Republic takes office.
6. The competence of local executive bodies, the organization and the procedure for their activities shall be established by law.
Article 88
1. Maslikhats make decisions on issues of their competence, and Akims make decisions and orders that are binding on the territory
of the corresponding administrative and territorial unit.
2. Draft decisions of Maslikhats providing for a reduction in local budget revenues or an increase in local budget expenditures can
be submitted for consideration only if there is a positive conclusion by an Akim.
3. Decisions of Maslikhats that do not comply with the Constitution and legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan may be cancelled
in court.
4. Decisions and orders of Akims can be reversed by the President, the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan or a higher
Akim respectively, as well as in court.
Article 89
1. In the Republic of Kazakhstan, local self-government is recognized, which provides for independent decision-making by the
population regarding local issues.
2. Local self-government is exercised by the population directly, as well as through Maslikhats and other local self-government
bodies in local communities covering the territories in which population groups live compactly.
In accordance with the law, local governments may be delegated the exercise of state functions.
3. The organization and activities of local self-government in Kazakhstan are regulated by law.
4. Independence of local governments is guaranteed within the limits of their authority established by law.
Section IX. Final and Transitional Provisions
Article 90
1. The Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan, adopted at a republican referendum, enters into force from the day of the official
publication of the results of the referendum, with simultaneous termination of the previously adopted Constitution of the Republic of
Kazakhstan.
2. The day of adoption of the Constitution at a republican referendum is declared a public holiday - the Day of the Constitution of the
Republic of Kazakhstan.
Article 91
1. Amendments and additions to the Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan may be introduced by a republican referendum,
held by decision of the President of the Republic, adopted by him on his own initiative or on the proposal of Parliament or
the Government. The draft amendments and additions to the Constitution shall not be submitted to the republican referendum if the
President decides to submit it to Parliament. The decision of Parliament shall be made in this case in the manner prescribed by the
Constitution. If the President of the Republic rejects the proposal of Parliament to submit amendments and additions to the
Constitution to the republican referendum, the Parliament has the right to adopt a law that makes these amendments and additions
to the Constitution by a majority of at least four fifth votes of the total number of deputies of each Chamber of Parliament. In this
case, the President of the Republic signs this law or submits it to the republican referendum, which is considered valid if more than
half of the citizens of the Republic who have the right to participate in the republican referendum took part in the vote. Amendmentsand additions to the Constitution which are submitted to the republican referendum, are considered adopted if more than half of the
citizens who took part in the voting voted for them in at least two thirds of regions, cities of republican significance and the capital.
2. The independence of the state established by the Constitution, the unitarity and territorial integrity of the Republic, the form of
the Republic’s government as well as the fundamental principles of the Republic which were laid down by the Founder of
independent Kazakhstan, the First President of the Republic of Kazakhstan - ,Yelbasy, and its status are unchanged.
3. Changes and additions to the Constitution of the Republic shall be submitted to the republican referendum or to the Parliament of
the Republic for consideration if the opinion of the Constitutional Council on their compliance with the requirements established by
paragraph 2 of this article is available.
Article 92
1. Constitutional laws shall be adopted within a year from the day the Constitution enters into force. If laws that are defined as
constitutional in the Constitution, or acts that have the power of such have been adopted by the time it enters into force, then they
are brought into line with the Constitution and are considered constitutional laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
2. Other laws named in the Constitution shall be adopted in the order and terms determined by the Parliament, but not later than
two years from the day the Constitution enters into force.
3. Decrees of the President of the Republic, issued during the term of exercising additional powers in accordance with the Law of
the Republic of Kazakhstan of December 10, 1993 On the temporary delegation of additional powers to the President of the
Republic of Kazakhstan and heads of local administrations and having the force of law, may be modified, added or cancelled only in
the manner which provides for the changing, supplementing or repealing of the laws of the Republic. Decrees of the President of
the Republic, issued during the term of exercising additional powers, on matters provided for by paragraphs 12-15, 18 and 20
of Article 64 of the Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan, adopted on January 28, 1993, are not subject to approval by the
Parliament of the Republic.
4. Legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan which is in force at the time the Constitution comes into force shall be applied to the
extent that does not contradict the Constitution, and within two years of the date of adoption of the Constitution should be brought
into line with it.
Article 93
In order to implement Article 7 of the Constitution, the Government along with local representative and executive bodies are obliged
to create all the necessary organizational, material and technical conditions for free, as well as free of charge learning of the state
language by all citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan in accordance with a special law.
Article 94
1. The President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, elected in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan which is in
force at the time the Constitution enters into force, acquires the powers of the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan established
by it and implements these powers during the period established by the decision adopted at the republican referendum on April 29,
1995. With the consent of the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the present term of office of the President of the Republic
may be reduced by a resolution of the Parliament of the Republic adopted at a joint meeting of its Chambers by a majority of votes
from the total number of deputies of each Chamber. In this case, the Mazhilis of the Parliament shall, within one month, appoint the
election of the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan. The President of the Republic, elected on the basis of these elections, shall
take the oath within one month of the date of publication of the election results, and exercises his authority until taking office
as President of the Republic, elected at the next presidential election, to be held after seven years on the first Sunday of December.
2. The Vice-President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, elected in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan in
force at the time the Constitution enters into force, shall retain his authority until the expiration of the term for which he was elected.
Article 94-1
The provision of paragraph 1 of Article 41 of the Constitution, which determines the term of office of the President of the Republic,
applies to a person who will be elected President of the Republic following the presidential election held in connection with the
expiration of the seven-year term of office of the President of the Republic elected in the elections dated December 4, 2005.
Article 95
1. One half of the deputies of the Senate of the first convocation shall be elected for a term of four years, the other half of the
deputies for a term of two years, in accordance with the procedure established by constitutional law.
2. The provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan, on the election of deputies of the Mazhilis of Parliament and on
the basis of party lists, apply after the election of deputies of the Mazhilis of Parliament of the second convocation.Article 96
From the day the Constitution enters into force, the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Kazakhstan acquires the rights, duties
and responsibilities of the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan established by it.
Article 97
The first composition of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan is formed as follows: each of the President of the
Republic, the Chairperson of the Senate of Parliament and the Chairperson of the Mazhilis of the Parliament shall appoint one
member of the Constitutional Council for a term of three years, with the exception of the Chairperson of the Constitutional Council
who shall be appointed by the President Republic for a period of six years.
Article 98
1. The bodies of justice and investigation provided for by the Constitution shall be formed in the manner and within the periods
stipulated by the relevant laws. Prior to their formation, the existing justice and investigation bodies shall retain their authority.
2. Judges of the Supreme Court, the Supreme Arbitration Court, and local courts of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall retain their
powers until the formation of courts stipulated by the Constitution. Vacant positions of judges shall be replaced in the manner
prescribed by the Constitution.
Article 99
1. Until the formation of the Constitutional Court and the Supreme Audit Chamber, the Chairmen and members of the Constitutional
Council and the Accounts Committee for Control over the Execution of the republican Budget retain their powers.
Prior to the formation of the Constitutional Court, the functions of the Constitutional Court provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2
of Article 72 of the Constitution are performed by the Constitutional Council.
2. Normative resolutions of the Constitutional Council shall be applied in the part that does not contradict the Constitution, until they
are reviewed by the Constitutional Court.
3. The provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan on the formation of Chambers of Parliament are applied starting
from the election of deputies of the Majilis of the eighth convocation.